Cloud providers are forcing you into
their AI native cloud services whether
you like it or not. Let's talk about
that.
[music]
So, welcome to the cloud computing
insider. I'm Dave. Let's get going. So,
over the last year, something subtle but
massive has been happening in the
background of every AI headline. The
cloud itself is being rebuilt around
generative AI. What used to be about
cheap storage and flexible compute is
now a race for GPUs, proprietary models,
and all-in-one AI platforms. So, what
I'd like to do is take a look at how
this shift is occurring and how it's
going to affect enterprises out there.
As many of the cloud providers,
including the major hyperscalers,
Amazon, Microsoft, and Google is
shifting their focus to AI. Well, that's
having a consequence in terms of their
roadmap and the way in which they're
rolling out cloud services. Ultimately,
it means that AI native services are
going to start to appear in front of the
enterprises out there. And if they
leverage these services, whether they're
doing AI or not, then they're going to
see a bit of lock in. And so, we need to
talk about the trade-offs there. So the
AI native cloud is the idea that cloud
platforms are being redesigned from the
ground up around generative AI
workloads, not just traditional
applications and storage. And so we've
seen this since 2022 since the arrival
of ChatGpt and the generative AI mass
movement. All of the cloud providers are
rushing into that space. Now, what's
occurring, we talked about this when I
when I did my review of reinvent, is
that they're re-engineering their
platform to be an AI first platform. So,
in other words, they're not only
building AI services, things that you
can build and deploy, you know, AI
models and AI based applications, you
know, agent, generative AI, things like
that. We're not going to get into that
here, but the fact of the matter is is
that the AI is leaking into most of the
aspects of their infrastructure. So
whether you're using AI or not, it's
going to be part of their infrastructure
one way or the other. And many of the
services will be will be AI enabled. And
that causes a couple of things. Number
one, they're probably going to have to
charge you more money for that, uh,
whether you use the AI features or not.
And number two, and probably the most
concerning, it's going to lock you in.
So what's the evidence that this is
happening? Cloud providers are reporting
massive capital expenditures on GPUs and
AI accelerators in their earnings calls,
explicitly trying this spend in
supporting generative AI demand. So in
other words, they're they're calling out
the fact that their AI stuff is growing
and that's where they're spending the
majority of the innovative capital and
certainly that's been the case. If you
go to any of the cloud conferences over
the last uh you know three years they've
turned into uh generative AI conferences
and agentic AI conferences. Also major
cloud platforms have redesigned their
home homepages and top level messaging
to lead with AI services models
co-pilots AI platforms rather than
generic compute and storage flagship
cloud conferences. We talked about this
before, you know, such as reinvent,
cloud next, uh, Ignite or all all
focused uh, on AI. In fact, I would say
they they've turned into AI conferences,
moving away from traditional cloud
services, which basically used to be the
discussion into kind of an AI only play.
And as we talked about in reinvent, 70%
of their announcements were AI focused
and not necessarily focused on the
traditional business. And that's a
little concerning if you're not going to
leverage AI uh and you're just going to
leverage the traditional services. You
seem to be getting the short end of the
stick. Uh if you're not moving as fast
to AI as people think you should be
moving. Core cloud services, databases,
developer tools, and workflow
orchestration products are being rebuilt
uh and extended to include deeply
integrated AI capabilities by default.
and industry analysts now classify
generative AI cloud or AI platforms as
distinct competitive categories
evaluating hyperscalers primarily on
their AI offerings. Now if you look at
the hyperscalers that are being
criticized or being complimented out
there normally it's around the majority
of their AI features and not looking at
their ability to do cloud storage and
cloud comput systems the ability to
provide uh quality comput systems on
demand. It's how they're chasing uh the
AI trend. And obviously, you know, AWS
got some uh um criticism a few years ago
for being behind and obviously they're
trying to catch up when reinvent was all
about AI, things like that. So, it's
going to be their primary focus for a
while. So, instead of selling uh generic
compute and storage, cloud providers are
racing to become AI platforms with GPUs,
proprietary models, vector databases,
and end-to-end machine learning ops
built in. So this is undeniable. Um it's
obviously so obvious. I didn't know why
why I even needed to, you know, state it
again. But the evidence is there that
the focus is clearly on AI. While in
some instances, I'm not knocking AI,
that's going to be a good trend because
many organizations are truly looking to
use AI as a force multiplier and
typically using cloud providers as the
platform of choice to leverage these new
AI systems. The problem is the majority
of enterprises out there may not be on
to AI yet and it may be a few years many
years in some instances before they're
going to be able to afford it. Now
what's happening now is that their
infrastructure is changing beneath them.
So in other words they're leveraging
storage leveraging compute services
things like that those are becoming AI
enabled or basically the features are
turning to turning into AI enabled
systems which is not necessarily going
to benefit them. And if they use those
systems, which in some cases are going
to be forced to use those systems, those
native systems, they're going to be
locked into that cloud provider even
more. So all of that power comes at a
price and many teams are already seeing
cloud bills spike from training runs,
consistent in inference and always on AI
features. Uh so in other words the
prices are definitely trending up and
architecturally the cloud is shifting
toward GPUTPU clusters specialized AI
accelerators and data platforms
optimized specifically for LLMs and
retrieval augmented generation or rag.
So infrastructure is changing
infrastructure is changing primarily
around the AI models um not necessarily
focused on the traditional patterns of
computing which we've used over the last
30 years. AI, by the way, is nothing
new. It's been around for a long period
of time, but it's a different focus.
It's a different way of developing. It's
a different way of using the technology.
And you certainly have value in using it
for some problems, but not all problems.
So, I know what some of you are saying.
What's the big deal, Dave? If
everybody's moving to AI, that's good.
You know, that's where the next
generation of computing is going to be
probably. But the big risk is AI
platform lock in where your data models
and tooling become so tightly coupled to
one vendor that switching becomes nearly
impossible if not overly expensive.
There's a type of lock in that I call
economic lock in. It doesn't mean you
can't move off of the provider. That's
always going to be an option if you're
willing to spend enough money and time.
The problem is it may be uneconomically
viable to do so. And so many of these
organizations are going to find that
they're locked into a particular cloud
provider. they want to move off that
cloud provider for whatever reason. Uh
cost, you know, sovereign, you know,
data sovereignty, things like that. And
in order to do that, they're going to
have to spend way more than they thought
they would. And so it's uneconomically
viable. So they just kind of leave the
system where it is and go ahead and, you
know, pay um, you know, pay the
technical debt and pay the technical uh
hosting costs for it remaining on that
cloud. So, Agentic AI and AIdriven
automation are being pitched as the next
productivity waves where cloud hosted AI
agents can call tools, trigger workflows
and act on your behalf. So, that's how
things are being sold out there. You
know, definitely the Agentic thing is
kind of way out over its skis and I
think people are using it in too many
places where it shouldn't be used and
cloud providers are first and foremost
in that. Nothing wrong with Agentic AI
as you guys know and I mentioned a few
times before, you know, I make uh
Agentic AI courses and teach Agentic AI.
Love it as an architectural option, but
it's not always going to be an option.
It shouldn't always be the solution. So,
with the Agentic AI stuff, you know,
everything's kind of looking like a nail
and we're overusing the technology and
the cloud providers, I think, are the
worst offenders. So, what the cloud
providers are pushing is something
that's called AI ready. Cloud
architecture means having clean
accessible data, smart choice between
proprietary and open source models and
scalable inference endpoints that won't
blow your budget. So what I'm pitching
here is not moving away from AI that
definitely not. What I am pitching here
is that we pick the platforms that are
right for the applications that are
running and we're not trying to
overengineer or over or underoptimize
these systems by overusing a particular
technology such as AI. So if AI is not
needed, it's an expense that typically
should not be added to the cost of an
application. And people don't see it out
see it that way. They think that every
infrastructure, every application,
everything that's built can benefit from
an AI capability. Um maybe sometimes,
not all the time though. So we need to
think hard and fast in terms of when we
leverage the technology. Now if an AI
platform, a cloud computing platform is
pushing AI at you and it's going to be
something that's very much a force fit.
In other words, you can't get away. You
can't get away from it. You know, maybe
it's time to look for other platforms
that don't do that to you. So, to stay
in control, organizations need to treat
AI costs as first class design
constraints to build in observability
guard rails and clear budgets from day
one. I can't stress that enough.
Everything needs to be planned and I'm
not seeing a lot of planning going on
right now. seeing a lot of knee-jerk
movement into the AI space with not a
lot of thinking about what the business
needs and that's just going to end a
disaster and we've done that before in
the past and can point to many times
where you know organizations have you
know pushed things too fast misalign
technology to the business problems and
ended up failing. So the key strategic
question for every team is how to
leverage the benefits of AI native cloud
without handing over control of cost
architecture and innovation to a single
provider. That's really key to this. At
the end of the day, you're the one who
makes the decisions and how you're going
to build and deploy your applications.
You're the one who makes the decisions
as to what platform you're going to run
on. lock-in systems or systems where
you're bound down in proprietary ways
that technology providers are pushing
you to is not going to be an advantage
to you. I understand they're telling you
it's an advantage. I understand that
they're telling you that look at these
new capabilities. Look what we can do
with some of these AI agents. Look at
some of the operation systems, the
observability systems, security systems
that are AI enabled. You know, this is
this is going to be a better technology
for you. Sometimes yes. Most of the
time, no. It's going to cost you more
money. it's going to lock you in and we
need to avoid that. And the big
question, should you give up on your
cloud provider who's doing that to you,
pushing you toward AI whether you like
it or not. So this means, you know,
looking at all clouds like private
clouds, sovereign clouds, managed
service providers, everything we talk
about on this channel and go back and
check out those videos if you haven't
already. Those are going to be viable
options uh in that they're not going to
push you to typically proprietary lockin
technology. The large hyperscalers will
because they feel they need to. they
feel they need to drive up the stack and
provide sophisticated services that they
view are going to be gamechanging in the
market. However, many of the enterprises
who leverage those services will find
that they become lock in that are very
difficult to displace later on down the
line and and and uneconomically viable
to do so. And you don't want to be put
in that situation. You don't you don't
want a technology provider to dictate
your IT strategy. And I think many of
them are looking to do that. So as
generative AI eats more of the cloud,
the real story isn't just new features,
it's power, control, and cost. So we got
to figure out what to do with this
stuff. We need to look at some of the
choices that are out there and make the
right choices. Now I think for many
enterprises, this is going to be a
critical junction. So in other words,
are we going to continue on either
hypers scale or are you going to move to
different platforms? either your own
owns owned uh platforms that run in your
data center or data center you rent rent
managed service providers private clouds
sovereign clouds or some of the second
tier clouds that are out there you know
those are a viable option as well and
many of those aren't going to push the
AI first infrastructure uh onto your
stack they're going to allow you to make
those decisions and I think that's just
going to be a better way to do it so if
you're in this situation you feel that
your hyperscaler is dictating your
platforms you're concerned about lock
and you're concerned about costs, it's
time to start looking outside of those
hyperscalers and look at some of the
alternatives out there and see if
they're going to be a better fit. Some
sometimes they will, sometimes they
won't, but at least you're looking,
you're considering those options. Well,
anyway, let me know what you think in
the comments about this, whether you
feel you're being locked in or not, or
you feel you're perfectly fine and, you
know, moving to AI first and AI native
uh clouds that that are being pushed out
there now. But anyway, don't forget to
like and subscribe and check out my
other videos on this channel. Also check
out my inf world cloud computing blog,
underless LinkedIn learning courses, and
of course my generative AI architecture
course out on go cloud careers. And
finally, my latest books, unlocking the
power of cloud and an insiders guide to
cloud computing. So until next week,
stay very, very safe. The magical
YouTube algorithm thinks this is another
one of my videos that you should watch
now.
[music]
